# Processes

**Definition.** A process is an instance of an executing program, including the current values of the program counter, registers and variables. 

## Process Creation

Four events cause processes to be created:
* System initialization
* Execution of a process-creation system call by a running process
* A user request to create a new process
* Initiation of a batch job

In Unix there is a single system call to create a process: `fork`. It creates an exact clone of the calling process. After the fork the two processes, parent and child, have the same memory image, the same environment strings and the same open files.

## Process Termination

A process will terminate due to one of the following conditions:

* Normal exit (voluntary)
* Error exit (voluntary)
* Fatal error (involuntary)
* Killed by another process (involuntary)

## Process Hierarchies

A child process can itself create more processes, forming a process hierarchy. A process has only one parent so a process is more like an hydra than a cow. A process and all of its children and descendant form a process group.

All processes in the whole system belong to a single tree, with `init` at the root.

Windows has no concept of process hierarchy. When a process is created the parent is given a **handle** to control the child. However this token can be passed to some other process, invalidating the hierarchy.

A process can be in one of three states: running, blocked, ready

```
Blocked <-(1)- Running (3)<-->(2) Ready
|                                   ^
|                                  (4)
|___________________________________|
```

Transition (1) occurs when the OS discovers that a process can not continue right now. Eg. reading from a pipe when there is no input.

Transition (2) and (3) are caused by the process scheduler.

Transition (4) occurs when the external event for which the process was waiting (such as the arrival of some input) happens.

## Implementation of Processes

The OS maintains a table (an array of structs) called the process table, with one entry per process.

| Process Management | Memory management | File management |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Registers | Pointer to text segment info |  Root directory|
| Program counter | Pointer to data segment info | Working directory |
| Program status word | Pointer to stack segment info | File descriptors |
| Stack Pointer | | User ID |
| Process State | | Group ID |
| Priority | | |
| Scheduling Parameters | | |
| Process ID | | |
| Parent process | | |
| Process group | | |
| Signals | | |
| Time when process started | | |
| CPU time used | | |
| Children's CPU time | | |
| Time of next alarm | | |